---
title: Healing with Nature
menu: articles
kind: article
created_at: 2008-01-21
---

Recently I've been reading about the healing effects of nature and natural
environments. A number of studies seem to indicate that physical healing is
enhanced and psychological stress reduced when a person is able to view nature
and when they are able to experience being in a natural setting or garden
environment. One interesting study (Ulrich, 1984) of patients recovering from
surgery evaluates whether being assigned a room with a window view of nature
versus an identical room with a view of a brick wall impacts postsurgical
healing and a patients' experience of pain. To briefly summarize, those with a
tree view recovered more quickly, had fewer minor postsurgical complications
and received weaker doses of pain medication than those with the view of a
brick wall.

This isn't especially surprising to me as someone who finds nature very
compelling and relaxing. Spending even a few minutes with the soft rustle of
leaves, the chirp of birds and the fragrance and freshness of the outdoors can
have a profound effect. After leg surgery a few years ago, in significant pain,
I spent as much time as possible with my leg propped up sitting in the garden,
absorbing the sights, sounds, and smells. It helped immensely. Perhaps this is
why so many people enjoy gardening and outdoor recreation. I believe we are in
some measure healing ourselves when we set aside the agenda’s and to-do lists
that can create stress and allow ourselves to enjoy the moment. There are many
tools we can use to reduce stress and promote healing and I consider time with
nature to be one of them.

As I write this, it’s the middle of January in New Hampshire with plenty of
snow and cold temperatures so the earthy smell is replaced by the fresh smell
of snow and the outdoor plants are buried. I choose to have a number of large
houseplants indoors to provide me with a sense of ongoing growth and life, and
I enjoy a view of squirrels and birds around a variety of bird feeders outdoors.

In considering your environment, are there ways you can enhance your physical
and emotional well-being through subtle changes to your environment? Perhaps
orienting your desk or bed so you can enjoy a view of nature, or adding more
color during the winter months, or designing an indoor or outdoor garden spot.

If you have a moment, enjoy being creative!
