---
title: "Joy: Elusive or Overlooked?"
menu: articles
kind: article
created_at: 2007-05-06
---

Of course we know when we are feeling joyful, right?  We feel exuberant,
happy, light hearted or optimistic. Or, there can be those quieter moments of
joy when we feel a sense of peace, serenity and acceptance. How often do we
notice these moments in our lives?  Sometimes joyful moments can be fleeting
and our overall view of our lives may not seem particularly joyful or
uplifting. Often, there are more of these moments scattered here and there
than we recognize in our rush to get through the responsibilities of our day.

Currently there is an emerging interest in "mindfulness" and finding ways of
clearing ourselves of the mental static we often have, so we can be fully
present to the experience of the moment, whatever it may be. This can help us
notice and appreciate more of those quiet moments of joy when we feel a sense
of peace and acceptance. We may also notice pain we have been avoiding. By
acknowledging and working constructively with the pain, we can help ourselves
move through it to experience increased peace and acceptance.

It's tempting to think life would be simpler if we could control more of the
circumstances of our lives or escape them when we've had enough. Perhaps it
would. On the other hand, we often do not see the opportunity and meaning a
life situation can bring until we have experienced it and look back to try to
make sense of the experience. Sometimes we need to learn some new tools in
order to do this more effectively.

What helps you find peace, understanding and a sense of acceptance of who you
are and how your life is unfolding? Are there additional tools that could help
you notice and enhance moments of joy in your life? Here is one easy to use
tool you can try, to increase your awareness and manage stress.

Once you’re familiar with this, it helps to close your eyes.  

Begin by inhaling deeply. As you exhale slowly and thoroughly, begin by
focusing on the top of your head and moving down through your body, imagine
letting any tension you are holding, release and drain out your feet, into the
earth.

Breathe in your nose deeply and exhale out your mouth. Notice your forehead
relaxing, your jaw opening and dropping as tension drains out. Continue,
noticing your neck soften (move it slowly to help relax if you like), and your
shoulders drop and relax. Next, as you inhale and exhale, continue through
your arms, chest and belly, allowing them to expand and then release and
settle. Next breathe and relax your pelvis, then legs and feet. Go through
your entire body 3 times. 

Next, close your eyes and imagine yourself in a peaceful spot of your
choosing. It can be an imagined spot or a place you’re familiar with. Feel the
air on your skin, breathe deeply and notice the smells and sounds. Notice how
safe and peaceful this place is for you. As you inhale, draw in the sense of
peace you feel here. Spend some time experiencing this. If emotions bubble up,
feel them, shed tears if you need to, then let the feeling pass on through,
returning to your experience of acceptance, peace and safety. When you're
ready, slowly leave this spot to return to daily life, bringing this sense of
peace with you.
