---
title: Pain's Silver Lining
menu: articles
kind: article
created_at: 2007-06-01
---

I don't enjoy pain and certainly don't seek it out. Yet in living life, pain,
both emotional and physical, seems an inevitable part of our overall
experience. In my more enlightened moments, I've recognized pain often is an
indicator for me that I need to take a new look at something, or enlarge my
view and see a situation from a new perspective. 

Recently I was driving in the car with one of my sons and talking about health.
Being a mom, this is a familiar subject to me as I want to encourage my sons
to adopt a healthy lifestyle they can sustain as they move out into the world
and live their lives. I'd noticed my older son had not been taking
particularly good care of himself recently, so I asked him what might motivate
him to make some positive changes. His response was that heâ€™s very happy,
quite healthy, and sees no current problem. In talking further he recognized
he might some day not be as healthy as he'd like, but until he experienced
pain of some kind he was unlikely to be motivated to change. While this is not
an answer a mother particularly wants to hear, I respect his honesty and
realize that for many of us, pain is our wake up call. Pain gives us an
opportunity to stop, reflect and evaluate, and choose a new direction or
vision for the life we want to lead. 

A while ago, I was delighted to see a friend I hadn't seen in years. He is a
cancer survivor and has made dramatic changes in his life this past year. We
talked about his painful ordeal of cancer treatment and his shifting view of
his life. He certainly would not want to experience that pain again, but said
he realized this experience was a catalyst for change. He recognized that he
might not have a future and this caused him to begin planning and doing the
things that were important to him as soon as he recovered enough strength.
He is thankful to be alive and has found a peace and joy that eluded him
before cancer.  

Suppose we ask ourselves, what motivates us to change? Are we motivated by
inspiration, pain, or both?  When we experience pain, do we choose to respond
to the pain by becoming bitter and angry? Or, are we willing to work with the
pain and find a way to heal and move forward? What else motivates us toward
positive change?

I remember years ago a mentor of mine presenting me with a choice in how to
respond to a deeply painful event in my life. He more or less said to me,
"You have a choice to make. You can choose to become bitter, or you can choose
to work with this and let your broken heart be transformed and strengthened
through your suffering." It was clear he had no judgment of me; it was simply
a choice I had to make. I chose to focus on transformation and strengthening
and it is an ongoing journey that has changed my life.

I am not an advocate of pain. Long term, chronic pain can wear us down and sap
our sense of hope and optimism. With intense physical pain it is important to
find effective pain management that takes our overall health into account.
With emotional pain we can receive supportive guidance and renew ourselves.
Even when we are motivated to address our pain, it is important to find ways
of taking a break, having some healthy fun, and remember why being alive
feels worthwhile. 

All pain obviously is not alike. There are many poignant moments for each of
us that are significant and yet naturally weave themselves into the fabric of
our lives without huge upheaval. Then there are those experiences that cause
us to deeply question life and its purpose and meaning. These experiences can
strip away our sense of significance in the day to day details of life, and
can leave us feeling disoriented. It has been my experience that as I have
survived, strengthened, and healed from these experiences, I have found a
deeper sense of meaning, purpose, and appreciation for life. It is my hope
that we can all experience as much joy and fulfillment in life as possible.

In your life, when emotional pain grips you, do you have supportive guidance
to help you through it? Support and inspiration can come through counseling
and psychotherapy, friends and mentors, inspiring books and teachers, nature,
uplifting music, spiritual practices and prayers, and other avenues you find
meaningful. It might be useful to ask yourself, what quality or qualities in
you are being called upon to be strengthened to cope with this current
situation? Is it courage, faith, strength, acceptance...? I wonder, when faced
with bitterness or healing, which will you choose? It's a choice that may
change your life.
